---
title: "Let there be light"
date: 2026-01-23
lastmod: 2026-01-29
tags:
  - essays
  - renaissance
  - ai
  - optimism
  - build
  - world models
draft: false
description: ""
---

# 23/01/2026: Inspo – Essay writing as personal sovereignty / Writing is thinking

In just a few years the AI has progressed rapidly. I am stunned and in awe of the pace of development. Started with just next token prediction and now we are at world models. More and more of the writing & even thinking is being offloaded to AI's now. I want to actively exercise my thinking muscles. Writing is long context thinking, will help think larger and surface more of what is passing through under the surface.

## Pace of Progress:
In just a few years we progressed immensely. From next token predictors → Chatbots → Image Generation models → Voice generation → Video Generation → now World generation Spatial Intelligence

It is crazy that we can create artifacts in all these modalities, all you need to get started is text. Seed of an idea turned into reality through any medium you can think of. Speak and it shall emerge.

## Resonance – 2
Let there be light →
I can’t help but think of Genesis & the phrase Let there be light. It is an invocation that led to creation of the world and now.

Art is our attempt to encapsulate our ideas, emotion & feeling about a particular subject in a medium transmittable with the hope that invokes similar if not same emotion. If we can agree on that framing/definition then Art generated by using AI tools should qualify as Art. It can encode that emotion and convey that to the viewer.

---

# 16: Let there be light

It’s the first words uttered by God to bring order from Chaos.
The original prompt. "Fiat Lux", an invitation to create.
We are now entering another period of Renaissance.
What condition/preconditions led to Renaissance?
→ New form of knowledge
→ Expansion of human knowledge
→ Ushered in the era of enlightenment, intellectual curiosity.
We are at the doorstep of another such revolution thanks to AI. Even if all AI labs STOP developing models tomorrow. We have extraordinary tools at our disposal now.

**[Diagram: Let there be Light / Fiat Lux / Let there be [ ]]**

Word to Story
Words to Voice
Words to Image
Words to Video
now Words to Worlds →

You can bring to life new worlds & realities from your words
Your words have such power now.
It is our responsibility to Create
Engage in the activity of Creation.

There are no speed limits. You are your own guide. Create fearlessly. Enough of this doomer Mist. Don't fall for it. Yes I have heard the speeches of tech leaders speaking with a burden about being few lucky people while on this side. Prometheus just delivered fire to humanity.

---

# Renaissance

Renaissance didn't just happen because there were so many painters all in one place at once. Sure that is the case but why were they able to. I Medici Patronage is a key reason. For the spread of ideas. They were able to fuel the artists passions and helped with the Cross pollination of ideas which led to the exponential growth of innovation artistic or technological. The Medici Effect is my favorite book which goes further into this rabbit hole of how new innovations come together from Cross pollination from distinct disciplines.

If we can agree:
^ Medicis Vision and Patronage are key Contributors to the renaissance then it is clear that the future renaissance would need Vision too.

We are not all Da Vincis, we may not have the artistic terminology techniques that a top tier artist possess. But we can use AI, guide them to Create according to our Vision. They LLM's are trained on the great works of both recent & very old they can Create art in the vein of all great artists (keeping aside the ethics of how the training material is obtained).
The new Renaissance needs your Vision.
Use the tools, Co-Create with AI's. Dream big. You have the tools that can Create images in the same vein as great artists of past. Why wouldn't you Co-Create with AI and bring Your Vision to life.

---

# Don't Fall for Doomer Shit

Don't fall for doomer shit. Utilize fire, get good at it.
AI is the Tool that can generate worlds from words.
But don't forget the intent has to come from some place.
We don't know if AI's are Sentient beings who make art or have the urge to convey some unspeakable stuff! I don't see that yet at least in my interactions.

Everytime I sit in front of an LLM to Create, it is I, I have to carefully be aware and confront my ignorance of art. I don't have the words yet to bring my ideas to life... in my View **Artist** is anyone who can convey the unspeakable feeling, emotion in a transmittable state and model it into a poem, image, video, movie or world now.

And to properly wield the tool that is AI you need to know the language. You can not mash and roll the dice but thats not a guarantee. The tools come to life when You approach them with certain knowledge, make an effort to study the style to understand speak. Develop taste.

Without taste even when you Create the art will be blah. We already have a word for it **AI Slop**. It needs no definition. You know it when you see it.

Never before in the history of humanity did we have such powerful tools at our disposal. Play with them. We have that urge to Create. Experiment with AI, Create!!
Don't fall for Dooms shit. Prometheus came & gave us Fire.

---

# Fire Alone Isn't Enough

**Fire alone isn't enough.**
Discovering Fire didn't make our Ancestors human. Active engagement with it, tend to it, direct it, build with it.
The gift requires constant input, your attention & intention, time. That is the Price of entry. I think that’s an awesome bargain.

The one way to become irrelevant is to not engage with it. We need to not be paralyzed by fear or lulled into complacency.

Use your words to bring forth light from the darkness.
Fiat Lux → Let there be light.